mind your decisions i'm preshtalwalker
the following problem appeared on the
2002-2003
british mathematical olympiad the
challenge is to write a complete proof
it is not sufficient to provide a
numerical answer alone
find all solutions and positive integers
a b and c
to the equation a factorial multiplied
by b factorial
is equal to a factorial plus b factorial
plus c factorial i thank nahin
for the suggestion pause the video if
you'd like to give this problem a try
and when you're ready keep watching to
learn how to solve this problem
[Music]
we will get started by noticing a
symmetry in this equation
what would happen if we transpose the
variables a and
b because multiplication and addition
are commutative
we have an equivalent equation therefore
if abc is a solution then we know
bac is also a solution
what this means is that if a solution
exists then a solution
abc with a less than or equal to b
also exists without any loss of
generality
we can suppose a is less than or equal
to b
the proof will proceed in the following
four steps
first we'll prove that 3 is less than or
equal to a
then we'll show that b is less than c
then we'll prove a is equal to b and
finally we'll prove c
is less than or equal to a plus two and
solve for the numerical answer
let's get started by working out a few
cases
suppose a is either zero or one then
a factorial is equal to 1. we substitute
that into the original equation
and then simplify this equation only has
a solution if 0
is equal to 1 plus c factorial
but no solution exists for this equation
where c is a positive integer
therefore a cannot be equal to zero or
one
we then consider the case a is equal to
two this means
a factorial is also equal to two we
substitute that in
and then we simplify the equation notice
there is no factorial
that's two more than another factorial
because the factorial sequence goes in
order
1 2 6 and so on therefore
this equation also has no solutions for
integers b and c
therefore a cannot be equal to 2.
this means a has to at least be equal to
3.
then we suppose that a is less than or
equal to b so we could add that onto the
inequality
from here we're going to prove that b is
less than c
to do that we'll assume the opposite b
is greater than or equal to c
and then derive a contradiction
we can bound the sum a factorial plus b
factorial plus c
factorial as follows we've assumed that
a
is less than or equal to b therefore a
factorial will be less than or equal to
b
factorial then b factorial is equal to b
factorial we can then bounce c factorial
because we suppose that c is less than
or equal to b
therefore c factorial will be less than
factorial this sum will be equal to 3
multiplied by b factorial so we have an
upper bound on the
sum but we can also derive a lower bound
this sum is equal to a factorial
multiplied by b
factorial we know that a
is at least equal to 3 which means
this is at least equal to 3 factorial
multiplied by b
factorial which is equal to 6 multiplied
by b factorial
therefore we've shown the upper bound of
the sum is actually lower than the lower
bound
and that's a contradiction therefore our
assumption that
b was greater than or equal to c must
have been wrong
and we've shown that b is less than c
before we proceed to the next part of
the proof i'm going to go over a bit of
notation
this notation means that m divides n
it's equivalent to saying n is divisible
by
m it's equivalent to saying n is a
multiple of
m and it's equivalent to saying that m
is a factor or divisor of
n 2 divides 4
3 divides 12 but 2 does not divide 5.
now let's show that a is equal to b
to do that we'll assume the opposite
that a is not equal to b
this means 3 is less than or equal to a
which is
less than b which is less than c
so we go to our original equation and
we'll divide both sides by a factorial
this simplifies to be the following
equation
notice the left-hand side is b-factorial
and the right-hand side will be the sum
of three
integers this is because b and c are
greater than a so b factorial over a
factorial is an integer and c
factorial over a factorial is an integer
now since b is at least equal to 3 we
know that b
factorial is an even number that's
because every factorial above 3
factorial will be an even number
consequently the entire right hand side
which is the sum of integers
has to be an even number now
since 3 is less than or equal to a is
less than b
is less than c we know that b
is at least equal to a plus 1 and c is
therefore
at least equal to a plus 2. but then
a plus 2 multiplied by a plus 1 must be
an
even factor of c factorial over a
factorial
that's because the product of any two
consecutive numbers is an even number
consequently 2 divides c factorial over
a factorial
now in order that the entire right hand
side be an even number
we must have 1 plus b factorial over a
factorial is an even number
but 1 is an odd number which means we
must have an odd number
plus an odd number so b factorial over a
factorial
must be an odd number now since b
is greater than a this implies that b is
equal to a plus one
the reason is that if b was at least
equal to a plus two
then it would have an even factor of a
plus two multiplied by a plus one
which is not possible since b factorial
over a factorial is an odd number
so from here let's consider what happens
if b is equal to a plus one
we'll substitute that into our equation
and we'll simplify
we now consider the divisibility of this
equation by the factor
a plus 1. the left-hand side
is a plus 1 factorial naturally it has a
factor
of a plus one the right hand side will
be the sum
of three integers naturally a plus one
has a factor of a plus one
now c factorial over a factorial will
also have a factor of a plus one
because c is at least equal to a plus
two
therefore for the right hand side to be
divisible by a plus one
we must have a plus one divide one
but that means that a is equal to 0 and
that's a contradiction
because we know that a is at least equal
to 3.
therefore our original assumption was
wrong
we cannot have a is not equal to b we
must have
a is equal to b we will then consider
the next step from here we want to prove
that c
is less than or equal to a plus 2. we'll
again
take our original equation divide both
sides by a factorial
we're going to substitute that a is
equal to b
and then we'll simplify this equation
we'll simplify it a little more
and then we'll subtract 2 from both
sides we'll again look at divisibility
since 3 is less than or equal to a we
know that a factorial is divisible by 3.
however we then know that a factorial
minus 2
is not divisible by 3. this is because a
factorial is a multiple of 3 and we're
subtracting 2 from it
therefore 3 does not divide a factorial
minus 2
which means 3 cannot divide c factorial
over a factorial
now if c was greater than or equal to a
plus three
then c factorial over a factorial would
have
a factor of a plus three multiplied by a
plus two
multiplied by a plus one but three would
divide this product
because one of three consecutive numbers
must be
a multiple of three therefore we must
instead have c
being less than or equal to a plus two
so we only have two possibilities to
consider
either c is equal to a plus two or c
is equal to a plus one let's consider
each one in turn
suppose c was equal to a plus two we'll
substitute that into the equation
we'll then simplify this and now we'll
do a little bit of algebra
we'll multiply on the right hand side
and then
we'll take all of the eight terms to the
left and put all the constant terms on
the right
now in this equation notice that every
single term on the left hand
side of the equation is divisible by a
this means that 4 has to be divisible by
a
but since a is greater than or equal to
3 the only way this is possible
is if a is equal to four
so let's substitute a is equal to four b
is equal to a which is equal to four
and then c is equal to a plus two so c
is equal to six
well if we substitute that into the
original equation
we actually get something that does not
work 4 factorial multiplied by 4
factorial is not equal to 4 factorial
plus 4 factorial plus 6 factorial
therefore c is equal to a plus 2 it does
not lead to a solution
so we instead need to consider the other
case that c
is equal to a plus one now in this case
we'll substitute in
and then we'll simplify we'll move the a
terms on the left and the constant terms
on the right
now from this equation a does divide a
factorial
minus a which means that a would have to
divide 3.
since a is greater than or equal to 3
this means that a
is equal to 3. so we now consider the
possibility that a is equal to 3
b is equal to 3 and c is equal to a plus
1 which equals 4.
we substitute that in to the original
equation and ta-da
we found the unique solution this is an
incredible problem and the proof is just
so wonderful
thanks for making mind your decisions
one of the best channels on youtube
as always thanks for watching and thanks
for your support
[Music]